PEP: 9999
Title: Graceful cooperation between external and Python package managers
Author: Geoffrey Thomas <geofft@ldpreload.com>, Matthias Klose <doko@ubuntu.com>, Filipe Laíns <lains@riseup.net>, Donald Stufft <donald@python.org>, Tzu-Ping Chung <uranusjr@gmail.com>, Stefano Rivera <stefanor@debian.org>, Elana Hashman <ehashman@debian.org>, Pradyun Gedam <mail@pradyunsg.me>
Discussions-To: TODO discourse
Status: Draft
Type: Informational
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 2021-05-18
Post-History:

Abstract
========

This PEP proposes a mechanism to indicate that a certain
Python interpreter's package installation is managed by
external means (such as an OS package manager) and that
Python-specific package management tools like pip should, by
default, neither install nor remove packages in an
interpreter-wide context, guiding the end user towards using
a virtual environment.

It also standardizes an interpretation of the ``sysconfig``
schemes so that, if a Python-specific package manager is
specifically instructed to install a package in an
interpreter-wide context, it can do so in a manner that
avoids conflicting with the external package manager and
reduces the risk of breaking software shipped by the
external package manager.

Motivation
==========

Thanks to Python's immense popularity, software
distributions (by which we mean Linux and other OS
distributions as well as overlay distributions like Homebrew
and MacPorts) generally ship Python for two purposes: as a
software package to be used in its own right by end users,
and as an implementation language for other software in the
distribution.

For example, many distributions ship a ``/usr/bin/python3``
command which is both the ``python3`` command available to
end users as well as the ``#!/usr/bin/python3`` shebang for
Python-language software. Because there are no official
binary releases of Python for Linux/UNIX, almost all Python
end users on these OSes use the Python interpreter built and
shipped with their distribution.

These are typically the same command, which means that if an
end user installs a Python package using a tool like ``pip``
outside the context of a virtual environment, the new
package is visible to Python-language software shipped by
the distribution. If the new package is not
backwards-compatible, it may break software shipped by the
distribution.

This problem is particularly extreme because some
distributions have package-management tools that are
themselves written in Python. For example, it's possible to
unintentionally break Fedora's ``dnf`` command with a ``pip
install`` command, making it hard to recover.

This applies both to system-wide installs (``sudo pip
install``) as well as user home directory installs (``pip
install --user``), since packages in either location show up
on the ``sys.path`` of ``/usr/bin/python3``.

There is a worse problem with system-wide installs: if you
attempt to recover from this situation with ``sudo pip
uninstall``, you may end up removing packages that are
shipped by the system's package manager. In fact, this can
even happen if you simply upgrade a package - pip will try
to remove the old version of the package, as shipped by the
OS. At this point it may not be possible to recover the
system to a consistent state using just the software
remaining on the system.

Over the past many years, a consensus has emerged that the
best way to install Python libraries or applications (when
not using a distribution package) is to use a virtual
environment. This approach was popularized by the PyPA
`virtualenv`_ project, and a simple version of that approach
is now available in the Python standard library as ``venv``.
Installing a Python package into a virtualenv prevents it
from being visible to the unqualified ``/usr/bin/python3``
interpreter and prevents breaking system software.

.. _virtualenv: https://virtualenv.pypa.io/en/latest/

In some cases, however, it's useful and intentional to
install a Python library from outside of the distribution
that influences the behavior of distribution-shipped
commands. This is common in the case of software like Sphinx
or Ansible which have a mechanism for writing
Python-language extensions. A user may want to use their
distribution's version of the base software (for reasons of
paid support or security updates) but install a small
extension from PyPI, and they'd want that extension to be
importable by the software in their base system.

While this continues to carry the risk of installing a newer
version of a dependency than the operating system expects or
otherwise negatively changing the behavior of an
application, it does not need to carry the risk of removing
files from the operating system. A tool like pip should be
able to install packages in some directory on the default
``sys.path``, if specifically requested, without deleting
files owned by the system's package manager.

Therefore, this PEP proposes two things.

First, it proposes **a way for distributors of a Python
interpreter to mark that interpreter as having its packages
managed by means external to Python**, such that
Python-specific tools like pip should not change the
installed packages in the interpreter's global ``sys.path``
in any way (add, upgrade/downgrade, or remove) unless
specifically overridden.  It also provides a means for the
distributor to indicate how to use a virtual environment as
an alternative.

This is an opt-in mechanism: by default, the Python
interpreter compiled from upstream sources will not be so
marked, and so running ``pip install`` with a self-compiled
interpreter, or with a distribution that has not explicitly
marked its interpreter, will work as it always has worked.

Second, it sets the rule that when installing packages to an
interpreter's global context (either to an unmarked
interpreter, or if overriding the marking),
**Python-specific package managers should modify or delete
files only within the directories of the ``sysconfig``
scheme in which they would create files**. This permits a
distributor of a Python interpreter to set up two
directories, one for its own managed packages, and one for
unmanaged packages installed by the end user, and ensure
that installing unmanaged packages will not delete (or
overwrite) files owned by the external package manager.

Rationale
=========

As described in detail in the next section, the first
behavior change involves creating a marker file named
``EXTERNALLY-MANAGED``, whose presence indicates that
non-virtual-environment package installations are managed by
some means external to Python, such as a distribution's
package manager. This file is specified
to live in the ``stdlib`` directory in the default
``sysconfig`` scheme, which marks the interpreter /
installation as a whole, not a particular location on
``sys.path``. The reason for this is that, as identified
above, there are two related problems that risk breaking an
externally-managed Python: you can install an incompatible
new version of a package system-wide (e.g., with ``sudo pip
install``), and you can install one locally, but in a
location that is loaded by the standard Python command
(e.g., with ``pip install --user``). If the marker file were
in the system-wide ``site-packages`` directory, it would not
clearly apply to the second case. The `Rejected Ideas`_
section has further discussion of possible locations.

The second behavior change takes advantage of the existing
``sysconfig`` setup in distributions that have already
encountered this class of problem, and specifically
addresses the problem of a Python-specific package manager
deleting or overwriting files that are owned by an external
package manager.

The changed behavior in this PEP is intended to "do the
right thing" for as many use cases as possible. For the
following representative use cases, we analyze the two
behaviors that could be changed by this PEP: can you run a
Python-specific installer tool like ``pip install`` by
default, and if you do run such a tool, should it be willing
to delete packages shipped by the external package manager?
For simplicity, this section refers to pip's behavior,
although it applies equivalently to any other
Python-specific package management tool.

1. A standard unpatched CPython, without any special
   configuration of or patches to ``sysconfig`` and without
   a marker file. The behavior does not change:

   * Can you ``pip install`` without an override? Currently
     yes; after this PEP yes.

   * Can it delete externally-installed packages? Currently
     yes; after this PEP yes. Because the ``sysconfig``
     scheme used by any externally-installed packages is the
     same scheme used by ``pip install`` (which is to say,
     probably any externally-installed packages were
     installed by pip too), there is no distinction.

2. A distribution's ``/usr/bin/python3``, when running ``pip
   install`` as root or ``pip install --user``.

   * Can you ``pip install`` without an override? Currently
     yes; after this PEP no, because we expect distributions
     to ship a marker file.

   * Can it delete externally-installed packages? Currently
     yes; after this PEP no, because we expect distributions
     to use a different ``sysconfig`` scheme for their own
     packages than the default one that ``pip`` uses. Many
     distributions are already doing so.

     Note that on Debian and derivatives, the answer is
     currently no, because Debian carries a `patch to pip to
     prevent this`__. So, for those distributions, this PEP
     is not a behavior change; it simply standardizes that
     behavior in a way that is no longer Debian-specific and
     can be included into upstream pip.

     .. __: https://sources.debian.org/src/python-pip/20.3.4-2/debian/patches/hands-off-system-packages.patch/

     (We have seen user reports of externally-installed
     packages being deleted on Debian or a derivative. We
     suspect this is because the user has previously run
     ``sudo pip install --upgrade pip`` and therefore now
     has a version of ``/usr/bin/pip`` without the Debian
     patch; standardizing this behavior in upstream package
     installers would address this problem.)

3. A distribution Python when used inside a virtual environment.

   * Can you ``pip install`` without an override? Currently
     yes; after this PEP yes, because it specifically
     exempts virtual environments.

   * Can it delete externally-installed packages? There are
     no externally-installed packages in a virtual
     environment, so this question is irrelevant - all
     packages in the environment can be deleted. Even when
     ``pip``, ``setuptools``, etc. are installed into the
     environment, they are and should be locally-managed;
     they are not system-managed.

4. A distribution Python when used inside a virtual
   environment with ``--system-site-packages``. This is like
   the previous case, but worth calling out explicitly,
   because anything on the global ``sys.path`` is visible.

   * Can you ``pip install`` without an override? Currently
     yes; after this PEP yes.

   * Can it delete externally-installed packages? Currently
     no, because pip has a special case for running in a
     virtual environment and deleting packages outside it.
     After this PEP, still no, in a more general way,
     because system site packages will be outside any of the
     ``sysconfig`` schemes for the environment.

5. A distribution Python when used in a single-application
   container image (e.g., a Docker container). In this use
   case, the risk of breaking system software is lower,
   since generally only a single application runs in the
   container, and the impact is lower, since you can rebuild
   the container and you don't have to struggle to recover a
   running machine. There are also a large number of
   existing ``Dockerfile``s with an unqualified ``RUN pip
   install ...`` statement, etc., and it would be good not
   to break those.  So, builders of base container images
   may want to ensure that the marker file is not present,
   even if the underlying OS ships one by default. In such a
   case:

   * Can you ``pip install`` without an override? Currently
     yes; after this PEP yes.

   * Can it delete externally-installed packages? Currently
     yes; after this PEP no. This is a behavior change which
     we don't propose a way to override. However, since the
     base image is generally minimal, there shouldn't be
     much of a use case for simply uninstalling packages
     (especially without using the distribution's own
     tools). The common case is when pip wants to upgrade a
     package, which previously would have deleted the old
     version (except on Debian). After this change, the old
     version will still be on disk, but pip will
     still _shadow_ externally-installed packages, and we
     believe this to be sufficient for this not to be a
     breaking change in practice - a Python ``import``
     statement will still get you the newly-installed
     package.

     If it becomes necessary to have a way to do this, we
     suggest that the distribution should document a way for
     the installer tool to access the ``sysconfig`` scheme
     used by the distribution itself.  See the
     `Recommendations for distributions`_ section for more
     discussion.

   It is the view of the authors of this PEP that it's still
   a good idea to use virtual environments even in
   single-application container images. For instance, the
   example from `Docker's Python image`_ would be better
   implemented as::

       FROM python:3
       WORKDIR /usr/src/app
       RUN python3 -m venv venv
       RUN venv/bin/pip install -U pip
       COPY requirements.txt ./
       RUN venv/bin/pip install --no-cache-dir -r requirements.txt
       COPY . .
       CMD ["venv/bin/python", "./your-daemon-or-script.py"]

   .. _`Docker's Python image`: https://hub.docker.com/_/python

   This ensures that if you call out to OS-provided software
   in your code, write a downstream ``Dockerfile`` that
   applies OS upgrades, etc., any packages you've installed
   cannot impact the OS.

6. A Conda environment, where a non-``conda`` tool like pip
   is being used to remove packages. In this context, Conda
   acts as the external package manager and pip as the
   Python-specific one. This is currently supported by Conda
   as a way to install software not available in the Conda
   repositories.

   In some sense, this is similar to the first case, since
   Conda provides its own installation of the Python
   interpreter.

   * Can you ``pip install`` without an override? Currently
     yes; after this PEP yes, since Conda would not want to
     add the marker to prevent pip from running.

   * Can it delete externally-installed packages? Currently
     yes; after this PEP yes, unless Conda changes their
     ``sysconfig`` schemes to use separate ones for
     pip-installed and Conda-installed software.  Currently
     those are the same scheme, but it may be a good idea
     for Conda to change these, because if pip removes a
     package, it doesn't inform Conda of that.

7. A build of Python as part of an integrated monorepo with
   its own dependency tooling, such as a private monorepo at
   a software development company or an integrated package
   manager like Nixpkgs_.  In these cases, the authors of
   the monorepo may want to encourage use of the monorepo's
   own mechanisms for importing Python packages, for the
   same reasons as a software distribution would. They may
   also have custom instructions for how to properly set up
   a virtual environment.

   .. _Nixpkgs: https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs

   * Can you ``pip install`` without an override? Currently
     yes (at least ``pip install --user``); after this PEP
     no, because they would include a marker file.

   * Can it delete externally-installed packages? Currently
     possibly yes, depending on the details of how the
     monorepo finds dependencies and whether it's writable;
     after this PEP no, because they would configure their
     default ``sysconfig`` schemes to point at a
     non-writable location.

8. A distribution Python, used in the specific context of
   building a distribution package containing a Python
   library - e.g., building a ``python-xyz`` RPM by using
   ``pip install xyz`` inside the RPM spec file.

   * Can you ``pip install`` without an override? Currently
     yes; after this PEP, the build environment would need
     to find some way to suppress the marker file to allow
     ``pip install`` to work, but yes, provided it does
     that.

     See the `Recommendations for distributions`_ section
     for more discussion on how to implement this.

   * Can it delete externally-installed packages? Currently
     yes (assuming the distribution doesn't have an
     equivalent to the Debian patch mentioned earlier);
     after this PEP no. This change is fine because a
     package build process should not (and generally cannot)
     include instructions to delete some other files on the
     system; it can only package up its own files.

9. A distribution Python used with ``PYTHONHOME`` to set up
   an alternative Python environment (as opposed to a
   virtual environment).

   If the ``PYTHONHOME`` is copied directly from the
   distribution Python (e.g., ``cp -a /usr/lib/python3.x
   pyhome/lib``), with no modifications, then the behavior
   is just like a distribution Python:

   * Can you ``pip install`` without an override? Currently
     yes; after this PEP no, because you will have copied
     the marker file.

   * Can it delete externally-installed packages? Currently
     yes; after this PEP no, assuming the distribution used
     separate ``sysconfig`` schemes.

   This is a behavior change, but it seems to be defensible,
   in that if your ``PYTHONHOME`` is a straight copy of the
   distribution's Python, it should behave like the
   distribution's Python.

   If the ``PYTHONHOME`` is separate from the distribution,
   such as a copy of the standard library from an unmodified
   upstream Python (but used with a compatible interpreter
   from the distribution), then the behavior is just like an
   unmodified upstream Python and does not change:

   * Can you ``pip install`` without an override? Currently
     yes; after this PEP yes, because there is no marker
     file.

   * Can it delete externally-installed packages? Currently
     yes; after this PEP yes, because the distribution's
     changes to ``sysconfig`` won't be visible, and there
     will only be one shared scheme.

Specification
=============

Marking an interpreter as using an external package manager
-----------------------------------------------------------

Before a Python package installer (that is, a tool such as
pip - not an external tool such as apt) installs a package
into a certain Python context, it should make the following
checks by default:

1. Is it running outside of a virtual environment? It can
   determine this by whether ``sys.prefix ==
   sys.base_prefix`` (but see `Backwards Compatibility`_).

2. Is there a ``EXTERNALLY-MANAGED`` file in the directory
   identified by ``sysconfig.get_path("stdlib",
   sysconfig.get_default_scheme())``

If both of these conditions are true, the installer should
exit with an error message indicating that package
installation into this Python interpreter's directory are
disabled outside of a virtual environment.

The installer should have a way for the user to override
these rules, such as a command-line flag
``--break-system-packages``. This option should not be
enabled by default and should carry some connotation that
its use is risky.

The ``EXTERNALLY-MANAGED`` file is a metadata file in the
`packaging core metadata format`_, which is an
email-message-like format with headers and a body.  (At
current writing, that format is defined exactly as what the
standard library ``email.parser`` module can parse using
``policy=email.policy.compat32``.) If the file can be parsed
as a core metadata file, then the installer should output an
error message from that file as part of its error. If
``locale.getlocale(locale.LC_MESSAGES)`` returns
non-``None`` and the first element is a string of the form
``xx_YY``, and the file contains a header variable
``Error-xx_YY`` or failing that ``Error-xx``, then the
installer should use the value of that header as the error.
Otherwise, it should use the body of the message as an
error.

.. _`packaging core metadata format`: https://packaging.python.org/specifications/core-metadata/

If the file does not parse as a core metadata file, then the
installer should ignore the parse failure and instead just
use a pre-defined error message of its own, which should
suggest that the user create a virtual environment to
install packages.

Software distributors who have a non-Python-specific package
manager that manages libraries in the ``sys.path`` of their
Python package should, in general, ship a
``EXTERNALLY-MANAGED`` file in their standard library
directory. For instance, Debian may ship a file in
``/usr/lib/python3.9/EXTERNALLY-MANAGED`` consisting of
something like

::

    To install Python packages system-wide, try apt install
    python3-xyz, where xyz is the package you are trying to
    install.

    If you wish to install a non-Debian-packaged Python
    package, create a virtual environment using python3 -m
    venv path/to/venv. Then use path/to/venv/bin/python and
    path/to/venv/bin/pip. Make sure you have python3-full
    installed.

    If you wish to install a non-Debian packaged Python
    application, it may be easiest to use pipx install xyz,
    which will manage a virtual environment for you. Make
    sure you have pipx installed.

    See /usr/share/doc/python3.9/README.venv for more
    information.

which provides useful and distribution-relevant information
to a user trying to install a package.

In certain contexts, such as single-application container
images that aren't updated after creation, a distributor may
choose not to ship an ``EXTERNALLY-MANAGED`` file, so that
users can install whatever they like (as they can today)
without having to manually override this rule.

Writing to only the target ``sysconfig`` scheme
-----------------------------------------------

Usually, a Python package installer installs to directories
in a scheme returned by the ``sysconfig`` standard library
package.  Ordinarily, this is the scheme returned by
``sysconfig.get_default_scheme()``, but based on
configuration (e.g. ``pip install --user``), it may use a
different scheme.

Whenever the installer is installing to a ``sysconfig``
scheme, this PEP specifies that the installer should never
modify or delete files outside of that scheme. For instance,
if it's upgrading a package, and the package is already
installed in a directory outside that scheme (perhaps in a
directory from another scheme), it should leave the existing
files alone.

If the installer does end up shadowing an existing
installation during an upgrade, we recommend that it
produces a warning at the end of its run.

If the installer is installing to a location outside of a
``sysconfig`` scheme (e.g., ``pip install --target``), then
this subsection does not apply.

Recommendations for distributions
=================================

This section is non-normative. It provides advice we think
is a good idea for distributions to follow unless they have
a specific reason otherwise.

* Distributions should create an ``EXTERNALLY-MANAGED`` file
  in their ``stdlib`` directory.

* Distributions that produce official images for
  single-application containers (e.g., Docker container
  images) should remove the ``EXTERNALLY-MANAGED`` file,
  preferably in a way that makes it not come back if a user
  of that image installs package updates inside their image
  (think ``RUN apt-get dist-upgrade``). On dpkg-based
  systems, using ``dpkg-divert --local`` to persistently
  rename the file would work. On other systems, there may
  need to be some configuration flag available to a
  post-install script to re-remove the
  ``EXTERNALLY-MANAGED`` file.

* The file should contain a useful and distribution-relevant
  error message indicating both how to install system-wide
  packages via the distribution's package manager and how to
  set up a virtual environment. If your distribution is
  often used by users in a state where the ``python3``
  command is available (and especially where ``pip`` or
  ``get-pip`` is available) but ``python3 -m venv`` does not
  work, the message should indicate clearly how to make
  ``python3 -m venv`` work properly.

* Consider packaging pipx_, a tool for installing
  Python-language applications, and suggesting it in the
  error. It automatically creates a virtual environment for
  that application alone, which is a much better default for
  end users who want to install some Python-language
  software (which isn't available in the distribution) but
  are not themselves Python users. Packaging pipx in the
  distribution avoids the irony of instructing users to
  ``pip install --user --break-system-packages pipx`` to
  _avoid_ breaking system packages.  Consider arranging
  things so your distribution's package / environment for
  Python for end users (e.g., ``python3`` on Fedora or
  ``python3-full`` on Debian) depends on pipx.

.. _pipx: https://github.com/pipxproject/pipx

* Distributions should place two separate paths on the
  system interpreter's  ``sys.path``, one for
  distribution-installed packages and one for packages
  installed by the local system administrator, and configure
  ``sysconfig.get_default_scheme()`` to point at the latter
  path. This ensures that tools like pip will not modify
  distribution-installed packages. The path for the local
  system administrator should come before the distribution
  path on ``sys.path`` so that local installs take
  preference over distribution packages.

  For example, Fedora and Debian (and their derivatives)
  both implement this split by using ``/usr/local`` for
  locally-installed packages and ``/usr`` for
  distribution-installed packages. Fedora uses
  ``/usr/local/lib/python3.x/site-packages`` vs.
  ``/usr/lib/python3.x/site-packages``. (Debian uses
  ``/usr/local/lib/python3.x/dist-packages`` vs.
  ``/usr/lib/python3.x/dist-packages`` as an additional
  layer of separation from a locally-compiled Python
  interpreter: if you build and install upstream CPython in
  ``/usr/local/bin``, it will look at
  ``/usr/local/lib/python3.x/site-packages``, and Debian
  wishes to make sure that packages installed via
  the locally-built interpreter don't show up on
``sys.path`` for the distribution interpreter.)

  Note that the ``/usr/local`` vs. ``/usr`` split is
  analogous to how the ``PATH`` environment variable
  typically includes ``/usr/local/bin:/usr/bin`` and
  non-distribution software installs to ``/usr/local`` by
  default. This split is `recommended by the `Filesystem
  Hierarchy Standard`__.

  .. __: https://refspecs.linuxfoundation.org/FHS_3.0/fhs/ch04s09.html

  There are two ways you could do this. One is, if you are
  building and packaging Python libraries directly (e.g.,
  your packaging helpers unpack a PEP 517-built wheel or
  call ``setup.py install``), arrange for those tools to use
  a directory that is not in a ``sysconfig`` scheme but is
  still on ``sys.path``.

  The other is to arrange for the default ``sysconfig``
  scheme to change when running inside a package build
  versus when running on an installed system. The
  ``sysconfig`` customization hooks from bpo-43976 should
  make this easy: make your packaging tool set an
  environment variable or some other detectable
  configuration, and define a ``get_preferred_schemes``
  function to return a different scheme when called from
  inside a package build. Then you can use ``pip install``
  as part of your distribution packaging.

  We propose adding a ``--scheme=...`` option to instruct
  pip to run against a specific scheme. (See `Implementation
  Notes`_ below for how pip currently determines schemes.)
  Once that's available, for local testing and possibly for
  actual packaging, you would be able to run something like
  ``pip install --scheme=posix_distro`` to explicitly
  install a package into your distribution's location
  (bypassing ``get_preferred_schemes``). One could also, if
  absolutely needed, use ``pip uninstall
  --scheme=posix_distro`` to use pip to remove packages from
  the system-managed directory, which addresses the
  (hopefully theoretical) regression in use case 5 in
  Rationale_.

  To install packages with pip, you would also need to
  either suppress the ``EXTERNALLY-MANAGED`` marker file to
  allow pip to run or to override it on the command line.
  You may want to use the same means for suppressing the
  marker file in build chroots as you do in container
  images.

  The advantage of setting these up to be automatic
  (suppressing the marker file in your build environment and
  having ``get_preferred_schemes`` automatically return your
  distribution's scheme) is that an unadorned ``pip
  install`` will work inside a package build, which
  generally means that an unmodified upstream build script
  that happens to internally call ``pip install`` will do
  the right thing.  You can, of course, just ensure that
  your packaging process always calls ``pip install
  --scheme=posix_distro --break-system-packages``, which
  would work too.

  The best approach here depends a lot on your
  distribution's conventions and mechanisms for packaging.

* Similarly, the ``sysconfig`` paths that are not for
  importable Python code - that is, ``include``,
  ``platinclude``, ``scripts``, and ``data`` - should also
  have two variants, one for use by distribution-packaged
  software and one for use for locally-installed software,
  and the distribution should be set up such that both are
  usable. For instance, a typical FHS-compliant distribution
  will use ``/usr/local/include`` for the default scheme's
  ``include`` and ``/usr/include`` for distribution-packaged
  headers and place both on the compiler's search path, and
  it will use ``/usr/local/bin`` for the default scheme's
  ``scripts`` and ``/usr/bin`` for distribution-packaged
  entry points and place both on ``$PATH``.

Backwards Compatibility
=======================

All of these mechanisms are proposed for new distribution
releases and new versions of tools like pip only.

In particular, we strongly recommend that distributions with
a concept of major versions only add the marker file or
change ``sysconfig`` schemes in a new major version;
otherwise there is a risk that, on an existing system,
software installed via a Python-specific package manager now
becomes unmanageable (without an override option). For a
rolling-release distribution, if possible, only add the
marker file or change ``sysconfig`` schemes in a new Python
minor version.

One particular backwards-compatibility difficulty for
package installation tools is likely to be managing
environments created by old versions of ``virtualenv`` which
have the latest version of the tool installed. A "virtual
environment" now has a fairly precise definition: it uses
the ``pyvenv.cfg`` mechanism, which causes ``sys.base_prefix
!= sys.prefix``. It is possible, however, that a user may
have an old virtual environment created by an older version
of ``virtualenv``; as of this writing, pip supports Python
3.6 onwards, which is in turn supported by ``virtualenv``
15.1.0 onwards, so this scenario is possible. In older
versions of ``virtualenv``, the mechanism is instead to set
a new attribute, ``sys.real_prefix``, and it does not use
the standard library support for virtual environments,
so ``sys.base_prefix`` is the same as ``sys.prefix``. So the
logic for robustly detecting a virtual environment is
something like::

    def is_virtual_environment():
        return sys.base_prefix != sys.prefix or hasattr(sys, "real_prefix")

Security Implications
=====================

The purpose of this feature is not to implement a security
boundary; it is to discouraged well-intentioned changes from
unexpectedly breaking a user's environment. That is to say,
the reason this PEP restricts ``pip install`` outside a
virtual environment is not that it's a security risk to be
able to do so; it's that "There should be one-- and
preferably only one --obvious way to do it," and that way
should be using a virtual environment. ``pip install``
outside a virtual environment is rather too obvious for what
is almost always the wrong way to do it.

If there is a case where a user should not be able to ``sudo
pip install`` or ``pip install --user`` and add files to
``sys.path`` _for security reasons_, that needs to be
implemented either via access control rules on what files
the user can write to or an explicitly secured ``sys.path``
for the program in question. Neither of the mechanisms in
this PEP should be interpreted as a way to address such a
scenario.

For those reasons, an attempted install with a marker file
present is not a security incident, and there is no need to
raise an auditing event for it. If the calling users
legitimately has access to ``sudo pip install`` or ``pip
install --user``, they can accomplish the same installation
entirely outside of Python; if they do not legitimately have
such access, that's a problem outside the scope of this PEP.

The marker file itself is located in the standard library
directory, which is a trusted location (i.e., anyone who can
write to the marker file used by a particular installer
could, presumably, run arbitrary code inside the installer).
Therefore, there is generally no need to filter out terminal
escape sequences or other potentially-malicious content in
the error message.

Rejected Ideas
==============

There are a number of similar-sounding proposals that this
PEP rejects or defers, largely to preserve the behavior in
the case-by-case analysis in Rationale_.

Marker file
-----------

Should the marker file be in ``sys.path``, marking a
particular directory as not to be written to by a Python
package manager? This would help with the second problem
addressed by this PEP (not overwriting deleting
distribution-owned files) but not the first (incompatible
installs). A directory-specific marker in
``/usr/lib/python3.x/site-packages`` would not discourage
installations into either
``/usr/local/lib/python3.x/site-packages`` or
``~/.local/lib/python3.x/site-packages``, both of which are
on ``sys.path`` for ``/usr/bin/python3``. In other words,
the marker file should not be interpreted as marking a
single _directory_ as externally managed (even though it
happens to be in a directory on ``sys.path``); it marks the
entire _Python installation_ as externally managed.

Another variant of the above: should the marker file be in
``sys.path``, where if it can be found in any directory in
``sys.path``, it marks the installation as externally
managed? An apparent advantage of this approach is that it
automatically disables itself in virtual environments.
Unfortunately, This has the wrong behavior with a
``--system-site-packages`` virtual environment, where the
system-wide ``sys.path`` is visible but package
installations are allowed. (It could work if the rule of
exempting virtual environments is preserved, but that seems
to have no advantage over the current scheme.)

Should the marker just be a new attribute of a ``sysconfig``
scheme?  There is some conceptual cleanliness to this,
except that it's hard to override. We want to make it easy
for container images, package build environments, etc. to
suppress the marker file. A file that you can remove is
easy; code in ``sysconfig`` is much harder to modify.

Should the file be in ``/etc``? No, because again, it refers
to a specific Python installation. A user who installs their
own Python may well want to install packages within the
global context of that interpreter.

Should the configuration setting be in ``pip.conf`` or
``distutils.cfg``? Apart from the above objections about
marking an installation, this mechanism isn't specific to
either of those tools.  (It seems reasonable for pip to
_also_ implement a configuration flag for users to prevent
themselves from performing accidental
non-virtual-environment installs in any Python installation,
but that is outside the scope of this PEP.)

Should the file be TOML? TOML is gaining popularity for
packaging (see e.g. PEP-517) but does not yet have an
implementation in the standard library. Strictly speaking,
this isn't a blocker - distributions need only write the
file, not read it, so they don't need a TOML library (the
file will probably be written by hand, regardless of
format), and packaging tools likely have a TOML reader
already. However, the ``email.message`` format is currently
used for various other forms of packaging metadata, meets
our needs, and is parseable by the standard library, and the
pip maintainers expressed a preference to avoid using TOML
for this yet.

Should the marker file be executable Python code that
evaluates whether installation should be allowed or not?
Apart from the concerns above about having the file in
``sys.path``, we have a concern that making it executable is
committing to too powerful of an API and risks making
behavior harder to understand. (Note that the
``get_default_scheme`` hook of bpo-43976 is in fact
executable, but that code needs to be supplied when the
interpreter builds; it isn't intended to be supplied
post-build.)

When overriding the marker, should a Python package manager
be disallowed from shadowing a package installed by the
external package manager (i.e., installing modules of the
same name)? This would minimize the risk of breaking system
software, but it's not clear it's worth the additional user
experience complexity. There are legitimate use cases for
shadowing system packages, and an additional command-line
option to permit it would be more confusing. Meanwhile, not
passing that option wouldn't eliminate the risk of breaking
system software, which may be relying on a `try: import xyz`
failing, finding a limited set of entry points, etc.
Communicating this distinction seems difficult. We think
it's a good idea for Python package managers to print a
warning if they shadow a package, but we think it's not
worth disabling it by default.

Why not use the ``INSTALLER`` file from PEP 376 to determine
who installed a package and whether it can be removed?
First, it's specific to a particular package (it's in the
package's ``dist-info`` directory), so like some of the
alternatives above, it doesn't provide information on an
entire environment and whether package installations are
permissible. PEP 627 also updates PEP 376 to prevent
programmatic use of ``INSTALLER``, specifying that the file
is "to be used for informational purposes only. [...] Our
goal is supporting interoperating tools, and basing any
action on which tool happened to install a package runs
counter to that goal." Finally, as PEP 627 envisions, there
are legitimate use cases for one tool knowing how to handle
packages installed by another tool; for instance, ``conda``
can safely remove a package installed by ``pip`` into a
Conda environment.

Why does the specification give no means for disabling
package installations inside a virtual environment? We can't
see a particularly strong use case for it (at least not one
related to the purposes of this PEP). If you need it, it's
simple enough to ``pip uninstall pip`` inside that
environment, which should discourage at least unintentional
changes to the environment (and this specification makes no
provision to disable _intentional_ changes, since after all
the marker file can be easily removed).

System Python
-------------

Shouldn't distribution software just run with the
distribution ``site-packages`` directory alone on
``sys.path`` and ignore the local system administrator's
``site-packages`` as well as the user-specific one? This is
a worthwhile idea, and various versions of it have been
circulating for a while under the name of "system Python" or
"platform Python" (with a separate "user Python" for end
users writing Python or installing Python software separate
from the system). However, it's much more involved of a
change. First, it would be a backwards-incompatible change.
As mentioned in the Motivation_ section, there are valid use
cases for running distribution-installed Python applications
like Sphinx or Ansible with locally-installed Python
libraries available on their ``sys.path``. A wholesale
switch to ignoring local packages would break these use
cases, and a distribution would have to make a case-by-case
analysis of whether an application ought to see
locally-installed libraries or not.

Furthermore, `Fedora attempted this change and reverted
it`_, finding, ironically, that their implementation of the
change `broke their package manager`_. Given that
experience, there are clearly details to be worked out
before distributions can reliably implement that approach,
and a PEP recommending it would be premature.

.. _`Fedora attempted this change and reverted it`: https://lists.fedoraproject.org/archives/list/devel@lists.fedoraproject.org/thread/SEFUWW4XZBTVOAQ36XOJQ72PIICMFOSN/
.. _`broke their package manager`: https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=1483342

This PEP is intended to be a complete and self-contained
change that is independent of a distributor's decision for
or against "system Python" or similar proposals. It is not
incompatible with a distribution implementing "system
Python" in the future, and even though both proposals
address the same class of problems, there are still
arguments in favor of implementing something like "system
Python" even after implementing this PEP. At the same time,
though, this PEP specifically tries to make a more targeted
and minimal change, such that it can be implemented by
distributors who don't expect to adopt "system Python" (or
don't expect to implement it immediately). The changes in
this PEP stand on their own merits and are not an
intermediate step for some future proposal. This PEP reduces
(but does not eliminate) the risk of breaking system
software while minimizing (but not completely avoiding)
breaking changes, which should therefore be much easier to
implement than the full "system Python" idea, which comes
with the downsides mentioned above.

We expect that the guidance in this PEP - that users should
use virtual environments whenever possible and that
distributions should have separate ``sys.path`` directories
for distribution-managed and locally-managed modules -
should make further experiments easier in the future. These
may include distributing wholly separate "system" and "user"
Python interpreters, running system software out of a
distribution-owned virtual environment or ``PYTHONHOME``
(but shipping a single interpreter), or modifying the entry
points for certain software (such as the distribution's
package manager) to use a ``sys.path`` that only sees
distribution-managed directories. Those ideas themselves,
however, remain outside the scope of this PEP.

Implementation Notes
====================

This section is non-normative and contains notes relevant to
both the specification and potential implementations.

Currently, pip does not directly expose a way to choose a
target ``sysconfig`` scheme, but it has three ways of
looking up schemes when installing:

``pip install``
    Calls ``sysconfig.get_default_scheme()``, which is
    usually (in upstream CPython and most current
    distributions) the same as
    ``get_preferred_scheme('prefix')``.

``pip install --prefix=/some/path``
    Calls ``sysconfig.get_preferred_scheme('prefix')``.

``pip install --user``
    Calls ``sysconfig.get_preferred_scheme('user')``.

Finally, ``pip install --target=/some/path`` writes directly
to ``/some/path`` without looking up any schemes.

Debian currently carries a `patch to change the default
install location inside a virtual environment`__, using a
few heuristics (including checking for the ``VIRTUAL_ENV``
environment variable), largely so that the directory used in
a virtual environment remains ``site-packages`` and not
``dist-packages``. This does not particularly affect this
proposal, because the implementation of that patch does not
actually change the default ``sysconfig`` scheme, and
notably does not change the result of
``sysconfig.get_path("stdlib")``.

.. __: https://sources.debian.org/src/python3.7/3.7.3-2+deb10u3/debian/patches/distutils-install-layout.diff/

Fedora currently carries a `patch to change the default
install location when not running inside rpmbuild`__, which
they use to implement the two-system-wide-directories
approach. This is conceptually the sort of hook envisioned
by bpo-43976, except implemented as a code patch to
``distutils`` instead of as a changed ``sysconfig`` scheme.

.. __: https://src.fedoraproject.org/rpms/python3.9/blob/f34/f/00251-change-user-install-location.patch

The implementation of ``is_virtual_environment`` above, as
well as the logic to load the ``EXTERNALLY-MANAGED`` file
and find the error message from it, may as well get added to
the standard library (``sys`` and ``sysconfig``,
respectively), to centralize their implementations, but they
don't need to be added yet.

References
==========

https://fedoraproject.org/wiki/Changes/Making_sudo_pip_safe

We can open these before the PEP is accepted and should link to these:

PR to pip for EXTERNALLY-MANAGED + ``--break-system-packages``

PR to pip for hands-off-system-packages.patch v2

MR to Debian Python to create the EXTERNALLY-MANAGED file

PR to upstream Python for is_virtual_env/is_externally_managed maybe?

TODO
====

Contact Conda, Poetry, Flit (takluyver), Homebrew/Linuxbrew,
pfmoore, python-maint@redhat.com

Copyright
=========

This document is placed in the public domain or under the
CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.
